Foxes are part of the Canidae family, which means they're related to wolves, jackals, and dogs, But unlike their relatives, foxes are not pack animals.
Foxes are medium-sized, between 7 and 15 pounds, with pointy faces, lithe frames, and bushy tails.
When raising their young, they live in small families-called a "leash of foxes" or a "skulk of foxes"-in underground burrows. Otherwise, they hunt and sleep alone.
Like the cat, the fox is most active after the sun goes down. In fact, it has vertically oriented pupils that allow it to see in dim light. It even hunts in a similar manner to a cat, by stalking and pouncing on its prey.
Foxes are the only member of the dog family that can climb trees-gray foxes have claws that allow them to climb and descend vertical trees quickly.
The red fox has spread far as its range is the entire Northern Hemisphere, from the Arctic Circle to North Africa to Central America to the Asiatic steppes. It's also in Australia, where it's considered an invasive species.
Like a guided missile, the fox harnesses the earth's magnetic field to hunt. Other animals, like birds, sharks, and turtles, have this "magnetic sense," but the fox is the first one we've discovered that uses it to catch prey.
Foxes are also prey to certain larger animals: eagles, coyotes, grey wolves, bears and mountain lion.
Foxes reproduce once a year. Litters range from one to 11 pups (the average is six), which are born blind and don't open their eyes until nine days after birth. During that time, they stay with the vixen (female) in the den while the dog (male) brings them food. They live with their parents until they're seven months old.
Foxes are known to be friendly and curious. They play among themselves, as well as with other animals, like cats and dogs do. They love balls, which they will steal from backyards and golf courses.
Although foxes are wild animals, their relationship with humans goes way back. In 2011, researchers opened a grave in a 16,500-year-old cemetery in Jordan to find the remains of a man and his pet fox. This was 4000 years before the first-known human and domestic dog were buried together.
They're a little unconventional, and they require more than a little bit of extra attention, but if you want a pet fox, you can have a pet fox in certain places. They cost around $8,000.
The arctic fox, which lives in the northernmost areas of the hemisphere, can handle cold better than most animals on earth. It doesn't even get cold until -70°C (-94°F). Its white coat also camouflages it against predators. As the seasons change, its coat changes too, turning brown or gray so the fox can blend in with the rocks and dirt of the tundra.
Perhaps because of the fox's ability to decimate a chicken coop, in the 16th century, fox hunting became a popular activity in Britain. In the 19th century, the upper classes turned fox hunting into a formalized sport where a pack of hounds and men on horseback chase a fox until it is killed. Today, whether to ban fox hunting continues to be a controversial subject in the UK. Currently, fox hunting with dogs is not allowed.
Foxes appear throughout folklore. Examples include the nine-tail fox from various Asian cultures; the Reynard tales from medieval Europe; the sly trickster fox from Native American lore; and Aesop's "The Fox and the Crow." The Finnish believed a fox made the Northern Lights by running in the snow so that its tail swept sparks into the sky. From this, we get the phrase "fox fires"
Foxes dig underground dens where they take care of their kits and hide from predators.
The tip of a red fox's tail is white, whereas swift foxes have a black-tipped tail.
Foxes eat just about anything, including berries, worms, spiders and small animals such as mice and birds. If they live in the city, they eat rubbish that people leave out. If they have extra food, they hide it in a small hole and eat it later when they are hungry.
Foxes have beautiful fur, and as a result, the heartless fur industry both breeds captive foxes and traps foxes in the wild. Eighty-five percent of the fur industry's skins come from animals living in captivity on fur factory farms.
Many fox species are endangered or threatened, unable to adapt to human encroachment, while the red fox enjoys healthy populations all over the world.
Fox vocalizations include chilling nighttime "screams", coyote-like howls, whimpers, "snuffing" noises, and a happy call that sounds like a human baby crying. But the most distinct sound most foxes make is a chuckling type noise called a "gekker".
In Russia during the 1950's, some interesting experiments were conducted that effectively produced domestic foxes within only a few generations.
There are twelve species of foxes in the genus "vulpus" which are known as the "true foxes". Among these, the red fox is the largest and most common, and is also the most wide spread carnivore in the world.
The fox is somewhat fragile in the wild. Even the amazingly capable red fox which can live to 10 years old has a surprisingly short life expectancy of perhaps only 4 years in the wild.
The red fox is not always red, but a variety of shades from cream to almost black.
A foxes bones are about 30% lighter than the same size bone of a domestic dog.
The fox is taxonomically a carnivore, but will eat almost anything, including fruit
The "fox hunt" is one of the most common themes in oil paintings, but rarely depicts the fox.
Like a cat's, the fox's thick tail aids its balance, but it has other uses as well. A fox uses its tail (or "brush") as a warm cover in cold weather and as a signal flag to communicate with other foxes.
